





1.ENGINE:- An engine or motor is a machine designed to convert one form of energy into mechanical energy.
      1.1.Heat Engine :-  Heat engines burn a fuel to create heat, which is then used to do work.
      1.2 Electric Motor:-  Electric motors convert electrical energy into mechanical motion.                                                        
      1.3 Pneumatic motors:- pneumatic motors use compressed air and clockwork motors in wind-up toys use elastic energy.
      1.4  Internal Combustion Engine :- An internal combustion engine (ICE) is a heat engine where the combustion of a fuel occurs with an oxidizer (usually air) in a combustion chamber that is an integral part of the working fluid flow circuit.
    1.5 Spark-ignition engine:- A spark-ignition engine is an internal combustion engine, generally a petrol engine, where the combustion process of the air-fuel mixture is ignited by a spark from a spark plug
    1.6 TYPES OF ENGINE:- 
According to the design of engine:
1. Reciprocating engine (piston engine)
In reciprocating engine the pressure force generate by combustion exerted on the piston(A device which free to move in reciprocation inside the cylinder) and it transmit the pressure force to crank shaft by use of connecting rod. So the crank shaft starts to rotate and rotate the wheel of vehicle.

2. Rotary engine (Wankel engine)
In rotary engine there is a rotor which is free to rotate. The pressure force generated by burning of fuel is exerted on this rotor, so the rotor rotates and state to rotate the wheel of vehicle.
According to the fuel use:
1. Diesel engine (compression ignition engine)
In diesel engine, diesel is used as a fuel. It is also known as C.I. engine because there is no extra equipment to burn the fuel. Burning of the fuel starts due to the temperature rise in compression of fuel or air.

2. Petrol engine (spark ignition engine)
In petrol engine petrol is used as a fuel. It is also knows as S.I. engine because in this the fuel is burn by the spark generated inside the cylinder by some extra equipment (spark plug).
According to the stroke:
1. Two stroke engine
In two stroke engine, crank shaft rotate one revolution in one time of fuel burn.

2. Four stroke engine
In four stroke engine, crank shaft rotate two revolution in one time of fuel burn.  

3. Six stroke engine
In six stroke engine, crank shaft rotate three revolution in one time of fuel burn.
According to number of cylinders:
1. Single cylinder engine:
Engine has only one cylinder and piston connected to the crank shaft.

2. Multi-cylinder engine:
In this type of engine more than one cylinder and piston connected to crank shaft.

According to arrangement of cylinder:
1. In-line engine
Cylinders are positioned in a straight line one behind the other along the length of the crankshaft.

2. V-type engine
An engine with two cylinder banks inclined at an angle to each other and with one crankshaft known as V-type engine.

3. Opposed cylinder engine
An engine with two cylinders banks opposite to each other on a single crankshaft (V-type engine with 180o angle between banks).

4. W-type engine
An engine same as V-type engine except with three banks of cylinders on the same crankshaft known as W-type engine.

5. Opposite piston engine
In this type of engine there are two pistons in each cylinder with the combustion chamber in the center between the pistons. In this engine a single combustion process causes two power strokes, at the same time.

6. Radial engine
It is an engine with pistons positioned in circular plane around the central crankshaft. The connecting rods of pistons are connected to a master rod which, in turn, connected to the crankshaft.

